Paper: How to avoid errors when quantifying thermal environments. _Functional Ecology_, _28_(1), pp.96-107.
Project: [[OTM]]
Tags: #papers 
Keywords: [[climate change]], [[microclimate]], [[operative temperature]], operative temperature thermometer, [[thermal heterogeneity]], thermal map, [[thermoregulation]]
Relevancy: [[High]]
Type: [[Theory]], [[Review]] 

Overview:

- Modelling thermal environments at high resolution becomes simpler when using operative temperature, which condenses [[microclimate]] and morphology into an index of thermal stress. Operative temperature can be mapped using large numbers of ‘[[operative temperature]] thermometers’, hollow models that duplicate external properties of the animal.
- A systematic error in operative temperature of 2 °C or a similar amount of climate warming can change predicted surface activity and indices of habitat quality, thermoregulatory precision and predation risk by 5–12%, and in some cases more than 30%.
- As construction details of operative temperature thermometers can affect their [[accuracy]] by 2 °C or more, biologists should use detailed physical models calibrated against living animals over potential ranges of postures, orientations and microclimates.
- Water-filled models do not measure operative temperature correctly, fail to capture thermal extremes and are an unnecessary complication as one can easily compute the body temperature of moving or stationary animals from body mass and the spatio-temporal distribution of operative temperatures.
- Often, the impacts of climate change have been inferred from large-scale meteorological data (Root & Schneider 1993; Buckley 2008; Kearney & Porter 2009; Buckley et al. 2010; Kriticos & Leriche 2010). Unfortunately, the body temperatures of animals do not correlate well with climatic variables such as air temperature (Porter & Gates 1969; Gates 1980; Helmuth et al. 2010). The environmental factors that combine to determine body temperature (air and surface temperatures, solar radiation, wind, tides, precipitation, etc.) do not always occur in the same relationship with one another. Furthermore, the direct interaction between organisms and their environment usually occurs at very small scales; for example, submeter variations in slope and aspect change the temperatures of intertidal mussels by 6–13 °C (Helmuth & Hofmann 2001; Fitzhenry, Halpin & Helmuth 2004). Comparable or greater variation in body temperature results from changes in posture and orientation of the focal animal and the nature of the supporting surface (Pearson 1954; DeWitt 1971; Tracy, Tracy & Dobkin 1979; Bakken 1989). 
- Indices that summarize climatic parameters simplify efforts to map thermal environments. One such index – referred to as either operative environmental temperature or operative temperature (Bakken 1981, 1992) – is particularly useful. By combining properties of a microenvironment (e.g. temperatures, radiation, wind) with properties of an organism (e.g. size, shape, posture), this index tells us whether that organism, given its current temperature, would gain or lose heat in that microenvironment.
- Operative temperature (Te) can be computed for a microclimate given properties of the animal that determine how air temperature, wind speed and electromagnetic radiation affect heating or cooling.
- Operative temperature can be defined as the temperature of an object with the same external properties (e.g. size, shape, colour and texture) as those of the organism minus its capacity to produce or store heat ([[Bakken and Gates, 1975]]).
- Because the size of the sensor equals the size of the animal, spatial and temporal variations in operative temperature can be mapped at the exact resolution needed to visualize thermal resources (Bakken & Gates 1975; Grant & Dunham 1988; Hertz 1992; Angilletta 2009b; Wethey et al. 2011).
- Important parameters: size, shape,color, heat storage capacity
- Operative temperature can change almost instantaneously, such as when the sun goes behind a cloud or when an animal moves into shade. Therefore, an ideal model would have [[zero heat storage]] to track operative temperature correctly through time. Hollow electroforms, which have low heat capacity, satisfy this requirement (Bakken & Gates 1975; Tracy & Christian 1986; Huey 1991; Hertz 1992; Sears et al. 2004). However, no real model has zero heat capacity, and heat storage can be significant for large models, which need thick walls to prevent another source of error, internal temperature gradients (Bakken 1992; O’Connor et al. 2000).